---
layout: post
title:  "How to change your life, forever"
date:   2021-10-09 18:56:00
categories: personal experiences
---

{% newthought 'As I work,' %} an open letter envelope lies on my desk. <!--more-->
It is full of small folded pieces of paper, containing messages from friends.
"I am glad you were part of this" one recites. "Thanks for listening to me" another.

This is the story of how I got them, and a story about what they mean.

### A "One-week long MBA"

Romania is a country that does not generally enjoy a great reputation here in Italy. Once a man told me he firmly believed that "Romanian immigrants brought smallpox into Italy". Although not all so extreme, Italians might have -conscious or unconscious - stereotypes about Romanians.

As a consequence, some months ago, when I announced that a one week trip to Romania, I was met with some confused stares.

Nonetheless, I had a very good reason for visiting: [Aspire](https://www.aspireacademy.ro/), "the only academy in Eastern Europe where Harvard and Stanford professors teach and inspire". I had applied for their flagship program: Aspire Academy, a "one-week long MBA", as Alex Radu, one of Aspire Academy's speakers, described it, and I was fervent with anticipation.

At Aspire, me and other 35 selected international students and young professionals were going to be exposed to a tight series of lectures, workshops and activities on themes such as leadership, entrepreneurship, communication and personal development. Although enticing, what made my board that plane weren't the lectures (or the 5-star resort in the hearth of the Carpathians where Aspire took place), but rather the impressive word of mouth I read online had received by friends in the months before.

Noticeably, people talked of a "life before and a life after Aspire", and often mentioned the impact of the program on their personal development. In retrospect, I believe Aspire is actually engineered to bend your life so that it does not drift on the inertia-bound path it tends to follow. Behind the scenes, every minute is somehow orchestrated in order to create the perfect ground for a personal blossoming. The very air that breath in Aspire is imbued with some sort of magic.

### Finding one's star in the black of night

When participating in Aspire, this July and August, I had the chance to see some of the mechanisms of the "Aspire Effect" in action. One of them are True North Groups.\\
To me, Aspire is all about deciding what to do with your life. And True North Groups are precisely the right tool for this goal. As Paul Graham said ["The bigger question of what to do with your life is one of these problems with a hard core."](http://www.paulgraham.com/hwh.html), and Bill George, the inventor of [True North Groups](https://www.billgeorge.org/true-north-groups/) and professor at Harvard Business School, understood that.

Choosing the direction of one's life is probably the hardest decision that any individual has to make every day. For this reason, you can't really go it alone. In a True North Group you and few selected others will form an intimate group that acts as a safe space where to share in-depth discussions about your life, past and future. The whole idea is to bring your past life choices, motivation and values out in the light, so to increase your own awareness on them as well as letting external observers provide helpful guidance and feedback.

True North Group sessions takes place at night, in a quiet and separate hotel area, where, in front of a glass of wine, each member has the total and complete attention of the others members as they speak about their life. And in that moment, someone who a moment before was just a classmate, a half-stranger, lets your gaze roam free in the innermost structures of their persona. As in an open anatomy book, each member points at masks, bleeding wounds, unexplained emotions: in an almost vertiginous experience you feel transplanted in someone else's existence. Then is when your own life is invested by a clear, straight light allowing a common experience of insight to materialize among the members.

I am sure many solemn resolutions were took in those nights.

### Radical transformation

Another piece of machinery responsible for the transformative power of the event came from the fact that, although international at the core, Aspire did not take place in some huge frenetic hub as London or New York.

Aspire took place in Romania, a singularity of a country, which could be pictured as a latin orphan among slavic neighbours. A true European nation, with a twist. Growing up, the young Romanians I met were imbued with the many contradictions of their nation and soon learned to accept and thrive in instability and uncertainty. Stubborn and optimistic, they often mix American ambition with the bluntness so typical of their home country, creating upright personalities capable of being equally shocking and inspiring.
Take [Anastasia Soare](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anastasia_Soare), Romanian born US billionaire, participating via Zoom, who got asked by a student how would she have handled insuccess. "What if I fail?" she answered without hesitation "I don't care, I'd do it anyway!".

Her attitude was matched only by her host, Alex Radu, a successfull Harvard graduate working in Goldman Sachs. Alex suggested a radical attitude when dealing with oneself. He presented an ["onion" model of personality](https://www.hfi.com/articles/work-behavior-explained), where some aspects of the self, such as they way we present ourselves to others, are positioned more externally compared to more internal and subconscious aspects, as our beliefs on how the world works. Our belief about ourselves too, are especially critical in this theory, since they might deeply influence our decisions without our direct knowledge. "I am a lazy person", "I give up", "I get discouraged easily", these are all examples of beliefs. They sit internally at the core of who we are and end up having a critical influence on our behaviour. Alex Radu suggest to treat your beliefs like you treat your clothes: choose the one you like, discard or change the other for new ones. "Find your disfunctional beliefs, extract them and implant new ones in their place". Although provocative, his message surely invites us to reflect on the usefulness and artificial nature of our beliefs, and on the ultimate power of human decision.

### On Romanians

Romania is often an underlooked country, for many unfortunately synonym of communism dread and insignificance. I wonder if Romanians who travelled abroad developed a thick skin in response, as they often appear to speak and act with attitude and confidence. When investigating the character a Romanian friend of mine, he confessed that he felt as "there's a time for self doubt, and a time for play. When you are in the game, play: don't undermine yourself". Don't show your cards, keep up the act.

This last rule must prove most useful in Romania itself, a country where there's a competition for everything.\\
I had an hard time finding someone in Aspire who did not compete - and win - in some sort of local or national competition. Debate, mathematics, programming, even history and geography, you name it. It is very common to meet Romanians working on two jobs, studying and working, working on side hustles, or attending two universities at the same time. The competitive and "American" attitude is palpable, and is no wonder that the rich curricula this work culture produces are well regarded by companies abroad. This is also facilitated by the baffling speed at which Romanians are able to learn languages: not a single person I met spoke less than 3 languages. This can be partially explained by the latin roots of the Romanian language and by the fact that Romanians are exposed to foreign tongues such as English and French since their young age though television, media ads and schooling.

### A different perspective

Given the Romanians' attitude towards work, you would expect a negative correlation with fun. \\
Surprisingly, that is not the case. "Romanians learn o party, dance and have fun at a young age, around 15 - 16" tells me Val, a microbiology student from Montreal, back in Romania for the summer period. Partying is considered a normal, physiological activity, to the point that high school balls are organized by the school itself and hosted inside clubs, drinks included. Indeed, Young Romanians enjoy a relative freedom from parental restriction in terms of partying, and have early on experience with night life. Consequently, when teens reach the adult age, they don't feel the urge to bridge drink or party the house down. In a sense, this sort of "Romanian early partying tradition" might be helpful in lifting the taboo around alcohol and night life, making it less of a secret pleasure, and therefore less dangerous for boys and girls.

"I was surprised when I came to Canada" she said "how everybody was bridge-drinking and getting wasted, like it was a cool thing". "In Romania, we do that in high school, then we get over it".

I asked her more about the hyper-competitive Romanian high school experience. "I did not like going to school, I had bad grades" she confessed me. "School was keeping me away from the things I really wanted to do: go out, meet people, manage my projects and follow my goals".\\
Now, these statements did not make any sense to me: in my mindset, only serious and total dedication to school work would win you a position to any "good" university. Val was actually proclaming the opposite, in an almost rebellious stance. She continued: "I had to prepare for my SLS exams so I did not really pay attention to my A levels. My professors knew that and were irritated but could not really fail me, as they knew I was a good student after all".\\
The "Romanian way" in student strategy was being unfolded in front of my eyes: don't work to be the best in the class, but to reach your goals.\\
"I had to learn how to cut corners". "Break the rules", she added, "try many things to discover what you like." This mindset surpassed her own expectations as she founded ad AI - biotech startup in Montreal and worked part time on another one, while being a full time student.

To me, her message carried a huge meaning as it was in total rupture with what most Italian high schoolers are supposed to do and think. In my environment, school is a punishing institution which goal is to trap students in a sequence of ever-increasingly difficult tests. The whole projectual and self-discovery focus Val had is totally missing, personal extracurricular goals are considered distractions and are not encouraged by teachers in any way. But, more than that, what really sets apart her approach is the relative weight given to school compared to other professional or academic achievements. School is not the only and absolute judge of your future.\\

### How leaders face change

As in a metamorphosis, at Aspire you are most likely to turned inside out: your beliefs about who you are, how you function, your own life story, Aspire is a time of self understanding and "self reprogramming" {% sidenote 'two' '[Psychology of Life Stories](https://www.sesp.northwestern.edu/docs/publications/430816076490a3ddfc3fe1.pdf)'%}.\\
This is the reason of the title of this article. Aspire is a school of change disguised as a leadership program. Daniel Goleman speaks of leaders as extraordinary individuals who can focus on the future and prepare the present for its coming. To predict, adapt and ride the waves of change, any leader needs to be a master of change.
And changing ourselves is arguably the hardest possible challenge that we might face in life. As Brianna Weist said, the world, as well as the individual, is plagued with "big, ongoing and seemingly unsurmountable issues". Climate disaster, obesity, addiction. And yet the solutions seem "so simple and yet so impossible to stick with": stop smoking, exercise less, cut carbon emissions etc.. {% sidenote 'two' '[The Mountain Is You, Brianna Weist](https://www.sesp.northwestern.edu/docs/publications/430816076490a3ddfc3fe1.pdf)'%}.\\
This is the most absurd paradox psychologists face: if only they could make people exercise a little more, smoke and drink a little less, the global impact on the health system would be measured in billions. And yet, such small changes are so hard that people "seem to change only when not changing seems the less comfortable option".\\
Change is extremely hard, and this might be the reason why only leaders succeed in it.

On our last day at Aspire we all grouped and prepared for the last salutations. Some of us might have parted ways forever, while others might be have seen the sprouting of new long-lasting friendships. We took the chance to share short messages of goodbye, carefully placed in named envelopes which we would carry with us on our journey outside Aspire. I believe these messages might be the last card in Aspire's masterful game.

Aspire is a concentrated emotional thunderstorm, meant to shake and uproot some parts of your self. Only the centrifugal energy of the moment, the atmosphere, the people, the conversations and smiles can imprint a first step of change, not only in your belief, but in your heart as well. Nonetheless, this power fades in time as life takes over again, as a barren volcanic island swallowed back in by the sea after a brief eruption. For this reason, Aspire infects its participants by attaching a living, beating peace of the event to them. These messages work as a memory trigger and bring back the reader to those days, and in doing so, to the emotional wiring reconfiguration the brain experienced in that period.

As we navigate in the wider, everyday, often colourless daily grind, only the determination, focus and strength of the leader can keep the rudder straight.\\
Aspire is just a metaphor, an inspiration, on what it means to exist across events, across days, across emotions, and carve one's straight line in life.


This is because the country does not generally enjoy a great reputation here in Italy. As an example of what I mean, I once met an Italian man who firmly believed that "Romanian immigrants brought smallpox into Italy". Although not all so extreme, Italians might have -conscious or unconscious - stereotypes about Romanians. \\

My reason for visiting Romania was [Aspire](https://www.aspireacademy.ro/), "the only academy in Eastern Europe where Harvard and Stanford professors teach and inspire". I had applied for their flagship program: Aspire Academy, a "one-week long MBA", as Alex Radu, one of Aspire Academy's speakers, described it.
